                               General Notice

Creative endeavors depend on the lively exchange of ideas. There are laws
and customs which establish rights and responsibilities for authors and the
users of what authors create. This notice is not intended to prevent you
from using the software and documents in this package, but to ensure that
there are no misunderstandings about terms and conditions of such use.

Please read the following notice carefully. If you do not understand any
portion of this notice, please seek appropriate professional legal advice
before making use of the software and documents included in this software
package. In addition to whatever other steps you may be obliged to take to
respect the intellectual property rights of the various parties involved, if
you do make use of the software and documents in this package, please give
credit where credit is due by citing this package, its authors and the URL
or other source from which you obtained it, or equivalent primary references
in the literature with the same authors.

Some of the software and documents included within this software package are
the intellectual property of various parties, and placement in this package
does not in any way imply that any such rights have in any way been waived
or diminished.

With respect to any software or documents for which a copyright exists, ALL
RIGHTS ARE RESERVED TO THE OWNERS OF SUCH COPYRIGHT.

Even though the authors of the various documents and software found here
have made a good faith effort to ensure that the documents are correct and
that the software performs according to its documentation, and we would
greatly appreciate hearing of any problems you may encounter, the programs
and documents any files created by the programs are provided **AS IS**
without any warranty as to correctness, merchantability or fitness for any
particular or general use.

THE RESPONSIBILITY FOR ANY ADVERSE CONSEQUENCES FROM THE USE OF PROGRAMS OR
DOCUMENTS OR ANY FILE OR FILES CREATED BY USE OF THE PROGRAMS OR DOCUMENTS
LIES SOLELY WITH THE USERS OF THE PROGRAMS OR DOCUMENTS OR FILE OR FILES AND
NOT WITH AUTHORS OF THE PROGRAMS OR DOCUMENTS.

Subject to your acceptance of the conditions stated above, and your respect
for the terms and conditions stated in the notices below, if you are not
going to make any modifications or create derived works, you are given
permission to freely copy and distribute this package, provided you do the
following:

   * 1. Either include the complete documentation, especially the file
     NOTICE, with what you distribute or provide a clear indication where
     people can get a copy of the documentation; and
   * 2. Give credit where credit is due citing the version and original
     authors properly; and
   * 3. Do not give anyone the impression that the original authors are
     providing a warranty of any kind.

In addition, you may also modify this package and create derived works
provided you do the following:

   * 4. Explain in your documentation how what you did differs from this
     version of RasMol; and
   * 5. Make your modified source code available.

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

                              RasMol 2.6 Notice

Information in this document is subject to change without notice and does
not represent a commitment on the part of the supplier. This package is
sold/distributed subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade
or otherwise, be lent, re-sold, hired out or otherwise circulated without
the supplier's prior consent, in any form of packaging or cover other than
that in which it was produced. No part of this manual or accompanying
software may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system on optical or
magnetic disk, tape or any other medium, or transmitted in any form or by
any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise for
any purpose other than the purchaser's personal use.

This product is not to be used in the planning, construction, maintenance,
operation or use of any nuclear facility nor the flight, navigation or
communication of aircraft or ground support equipment. The author shall not
be liable, in whole or in part, for any claims or damages arising from such
use, including death, bancruptcy or outbreak of war.

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

            The IUCr Policy for the Protection and the Promotion
                     of the STAR File and CIF Standards
                for Exchanging and Archiving Electronic Data

Overview

The Crystallographic Information File (CIF)[1] is a standard for information
interchange promulgated by the International Union of Crystallography
(IUCr). CIF (Hall, Allen & Brown, 1991) is the recommended method for
submitting publications to Acta Crystallographica Section C and reports of
crystal structure determinations to other sections of Acta Crystallographica
and many other journals. The syntax of a CIF is a subset of the more general
STAR File[2] format. The CIF and STAR File approaches are used increasingly
in the structural sciences for data exchange and archiving, and are having a
significant influence on these activities in other fields.

Statement of intent

The IUCr's interest in the STAR File is as a general data interchange
standard for science, and its interest in the CIF, a conformant derivative
of the STAR File, is as a concise data exchange and archival standard for
crystallography and structural science.

Protection of the standards

To protect the STAR File and the CIF as standards for interchanging and
archiving electronic data, the IUCr, on behalf of the scientific community,

   * holds the copyrights on the standards themselves,
   * owns the associated trademarks and service marks, and
   * holds a patent on the STAR File.

These intellectual property rights relate solely to the interchange formats,
not to the data contained therein, nor to the software used in the
generation, access or manipulation of the data.

Promotion of the standards

The sole requirement that the IUCr, in its protective role, imposes on
software purporting to process STAR File or CIF data is that the following
conditions be met prior to sale or distribution.

   * Software claiming to read files written to either the STAR File or the
     CIF standard must be able to extract the pertinent data from a file
     conformant to the STAR File syntax, or the CIF syntax, respectively.
   * Software claiming to write files in either the STAR File, or the CIF,
     standard must produce files that are conformant to the STAR File
     syntax, or the CIF syntax, respectively.
   * Software claiming to read definitions from a specific data dictionary
     approved by the IUCr must be able to extract any pertinent definition
     which is conformant to the dictionary definition language (DDL)[3]
     associated with that dictionary.

The IUCr, through its Committee on CIF Standards, will assist any developer
to verify that software meets these conformance conditions.

Glossary of terms

[1] CIF:
     is a data file conformant to the file syntax defined at
     http://www.iucr.org/iucr-top/cif/spec/index.html
[2] STAR File:
     is a data file conformant to the file syntax defined at
     http://www.iucr.org/iucr-top/cif/spec/star/index.html
[3] DDL:
     is a language used in a data dictionary to define data items in terms
     of "attributes". Dictionaries currently approved by the IUCr, and the
     DDL versions used to construct these dictionaries, are listed at
     http://www.iucr.org/iucr-top/cif/spec/ddl/index.html

Last modified: 30 September 2000

IUCR Policy Copyright (C) 2000 International Union of Crystallography

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

                             CBFlib V0.1 Notice

The following Diclaimer Notice applies to CBFlib V0.1, from which this code
is in part is derived.

   * The items furnished herewith were developed under the sponsorship of
     the U.S. Government. Neither the U.S., nor the U.S. D.O.E., nor the
     Leland Stanford Junior University, nor their employees, makes any
     warranty, express or implied, or assumes any liability or
     responsibility for accuracy, completeness or usefulness of any
     information, apparatus, product or process disclosed, or represents
     that its use will not infringe privately-owned rights. Mention of any
     product, its manufacturer, or suppliers shall not, nor is it intended
     to, imply approval, disapproval, or fitness for any particular use. The
     U.S. and the University at all times retain the right to use and
     disseminate the furnished items for any purpose whatsoever.

Notice 91 02 01

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

                               CIFPARSE Notice

Portions of this software are loosely based on the CIFPARSE software package
from the NDB at Rutgers university (see
http://ndbserver.rutgers.edu/NDB/mmcif/software). CIFPARSE is part of the
NDBQUERY application, a program component of the Nucleic Acid Database
Project [ H. M. Berman, W. K. Olson, D. L. Beveridge, J. K. Westbrook, A.
Gelbin, T. Demeny, S. H. Shieh, A. R. Srinivasan, and B. Schneider. (1992).
The Nucleic Acid Database: A Comprehensive Relational Database of
Three-Dimensional Structures of Nucleic Acids. Biophys J., 63, 751-759.],
whose cooperation is gratefully acknowledged, especially in the form of
design concepts created by J. Westbrook.

Please be aware of the following notice in the CIFPARSE API:

This software is provided WITHOUT WARRANTY OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR
A PARTICULAR PURPOSE OR ANY OTHER WARRANTY, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED. RUTGERS MAKE
NO REPRESENTATION OR WARRANTY THAT THE SOFTWARE WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY
PATENT, COPYRIGHT OR OTHER PROPRIETARY RIGHT.

     | Copying and Distribution | Contents | Installation Instructions |
    | Changes | Things To Do | Introduction | Source Code and Binaries |
                     | RasMol Manual | Release README |
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Updated 15 January 2001. yaya@bernstein-plus-sons.com
