                                    To Do
                               RasMol 2.7.2.1
                    Molecular Graphics Visualisation Tool
                                14 April 2001

                     Based on RasMol 2.6 by Roger Sayle
    Biomolecular Structures Group, Glaxo Wellcome Research & Development,
                        Stevenage, Hertfordshire, UK
           Version 2.6, August 1995, Version 2.6.4, December 1998
                     Copyright © Roger Sayle 1992-1999

                            and Based on Mods by
 Author             Version, Date             Copyright
 Arne Mueller       RasMol 2.6x1   May 98     (C) Arne Mueller 1998
 Gary Grossman and  RasMol 2.5-ucb Nov 95     (C) UC Regents/ModularCHEM
 Marco Molinaro     RasMol 2.6-ucb Nov 96         Consortium 1995, 1996

 Philippe Valadon   RasTop 1.3     Aug 00     (C) Philippe Valadon 2000

 Herbert J.         RasMol 2.7.0   Mar 99     (C) Herbert J. Bernstein 1998-2001
 Bernstein          RasMol 2.7.1   Jun 99
                    RasMol 2.7.1.1 Jan 01
                    RasMol 2.7.2   Aug 00
                    RasMol 2.7.2.1 Apr 01

                     and Incorporating Translations by
   Author                               Item                      Language
   Isabel Serván Martínez,
   José Miguel Fernández Fernández      2.6   Manual              Spanish
   José Miguel Fernández Fernández      2.7.1 Manual              Spanish
   Fernando Gabriel Ranea               2.7.1 menus and messages  Spanish
   Jean-Pierre Demailly                 2.7.1 menus and messages  French
   Giuseppe Martini, Giovanni Paolella, 2.7.1 menus and messages
   A. Davassi, M. Masullo, C. Liotto    2.7.1 help file           Italian

                              This Release by
   Herbert J. Bernstein, Bernstein + Sons, P.O. Box 177, Bellport, NY, USA
                        yaya@bernstein-plus-sons.com
                 Copyright (C) Herbert J. Bernstein 1998-2001
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

       THIS IS A PRELIMINARY RELEASE INVOLVING EXTENSIVE MODIFICATIONS
                        ***** USE WITH CAUTION ******

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                  IMPORTANT

This version is based directly on RasMol version 2.7.2, on RasMol 2.7.1.1,
on RasTop 1.3, on RasMol version 2.6_CIF.2, on RasMol version 2.6x1, on
RasMol version 2.6.4, and RasMol 2.5-ucb and 2.6-ucb. Please read the file
NOTICE for important notices which apply to this package. If you are not
going to make changes to RasMol, you are not only permitted to freely make
copies and distribute them, you are encouraged to do so, provided you do the
following:

   * 1. Either include the complete documentation, especially the file
     NOTICE, with what you distribute or provide a clear indication where
     people can get a copy of the documentation; and
   * 2. Please give credit where credit is due citing the version and
     original authors properly; and
   * 3. Please do not give anyone the impression that the original authors
     are providing a warranty of any kind.

If you would like to use major pieces of RasMol in some other program, make
modifications to RasMol, or in some other way make what a lawyer would call
a "derived work", you are not only permitted to do so, you are encouraged to
do so. In addition to the things we discussed above, please do the
following:

   * 4. Please explain in your documentation how what you did differs from
     this version of RasMol; and
   * 5. Please make your modified source code available.

This version of RasMol is not in the public domain, but it is given freely
to the community in the hopes of advancing science. If you make changes,
please make them in a responsible manner, and please offer us the
opportunity to include those changes in future versions of RasMol.
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

Combining RasMol Variants

The first steps in combining RasMol variants have been performed. Much of
the work of upgrading the documentation has been done. It remains to make
the changes to prepdoc to generate the RasFrames version. Several source mod
packages are being reviewed for inclusion. Features from other variants of
RasMol will be considered for inclusion in RasMol 2.7.n if the features are
particularly popular and if available resources (or helpful colleagues) make
inclusion of those features feasible. When we are done, probably in the
early fall, the resulting best version should be a reasonably stable and
reliable single version combining most of the features of the major current
variants of RasMol.

Some other important things still to be done

   * Add smooth double buffering to switch molecules for movies.
   * Additional language variants.
   * Fix problems with very large zoom scale.
   * Add GUI toolbar interface.
   * Resolve color management issues (including auto-sensing bit depth).
   * Make cross-eyed and wall-eyed setreo equally accessible.
   * Fix printing under windows.
   * Allow for longer names.
   * Add FAQ.
   * Finish incorporating A. Mueller's fixes for color management.
   * CIF and mmCIF write logic.
   * The read logic for large NMR structures on a Mac needs to be made to
     work.
   * The field widths for alternate conformer ID's and chains need to be
     extended to allow for the more flexible naming in mmCIF.
   * Resolve problem with interaction of stereo and shadows.
   * Allow writing of GIFs from high colour-resolution mode.
   * Improve memory management on Macs to allow larger structures.

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
Updated 10 July 2001.
Herbert J. Bernstein
Bernstein + Sons, 5 Brewster Lane, Bellport, NY 11713-2803, USA
yaya@bernstein-plus-sons.com
+1-631-286-1339
