                                Documentation
                               RasMol 2.7.1.1

                                  [RasMol]
                    Molecular Graphics Visualisation Tool
                               21 January 2001

                     Based on RasMol 2.6 by Roger Sayle
    Biomolecular Structures Group, Glaxo Wellcome Research & Development
                        Stevenage, Hertfordshire, UK
           Version 2.6, August 1995, Version 2.6.4, December 1998
                     Copyright (C) Roger Sayle 1992-1999

                      and Based on Mods by Arne Mueller
                           Version 2.6x1, May 1998
                       Copyright (C) Arne Mueller 1998

         Version 2.7.0, 2.7.1, 2.7.1.1 Mods by Herbert J. Bernstein
             Bernstein + Sons, P.O. Box 177, Bellport, NY, USA,
                        yaya@bernstein-plus-sons.com
           2.7.0 March 1999, 2.7.1 June 1999, 2.7.1.1 January 2001
                Copyright (C) Herbert J. Bernstein 1998-2001

    Translations of most of the RasMol messages into Spanish contributed
       by Fernando Gabriel Ranea (Laboratorio de Micología, Museo de
     Farmacobotánica, Facultad de Farmacia y Bioquímica. Universidad de
                  Buenos Aires (davinci@dinamica.com.ar)).

The original RasMol manual was created by Roger Sayle. In July 1996, Dr.
Margaret Wong of the Chemistry Department, Swinburne University of
Technology, Australia, made extensive revisions to the RasMol 2.5 manual to
accurately reflect the operation of RasMol 2.6. Eric Martz of the University
of Massachusetts made further revisions. In May 1997, William McClure of
Carnegie Mellon University reorganized the HTML version of the manual into
multiple sections which could be downloaded quickly and added use of frames.
Portions of the 2.7.1 version of the RasMol manual were derived with
permission from William McClure's version using Roger Sayle's rasmol.doc for
version 2.6.4 as the primary source.

                 Documentation Last Updated 21 January 2001

           Edited by Herbert J. Bernstein and Frances C. Bernstein

               Translation of RasMol 2.7.1 Manual into Spanish

   Thanks to the efforts of José Miguel Fernández Fernández (Departamento
   de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular. Universidad de Granada. España
   (jmfernan@ugr.es)) a translation of the Manual for Rasmol version
   2.7.1 into Spanish is now available. La traducción española del manual
   de la versión de la Dra. Wong revisada por Eric Martz fue realizada
   por Isabel Serván Martínez y José Miguel Fernández Fernández. La
   actual traducción del Manual de RasMol 2.7.1 ha sido realizada usando
   como base la anterior de RasMol 2.6 por  José Miguel Fernández
   Fernández.

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

                   Test Version of Next Release Available

RasMol 2.7.1.1 is an interim release for testing of the integration of
multilingual capabilities into RasMol. These same mods will then be
integrated with pending mods, and with the basic structure of RasMol 2.7.2
to create RasMol 2.7.2.1.

A preliminary release of RasMol 2.7.2 (without the multilingual
capabilities) is available at:

          http://www.bernstein-plus-sons.com/software/RasMol_2.7.2

       THIS IS A PRELIMINARY RELEASE INVOLVING EXTENSIVE MODIFICATIONS
                        ***** USE WITH CAUTION ******
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                  IMPORTANT

This version is based on RasMol version 2.6_CIF.2, on RasMol version 2.6x1
and on RasMol version 2.6.4. Please read the file NOTICE for important
notices which apply to this package. If you are not going to make changes to
RasMol, you are not only permitted to freely make copies and distribute
them, you are encouraged to do so, provided you do the following:

   * 1. Either include the complete documentation, especially the file
     NOTICE, with what you distribute or provide a clear indication where
     people can get a copy of the documentation; and
   * 2. Please give credit where credit is due citing the version and
     original authors properly; and
   * 3. Please do not give anyone the impression that the original authors
     are providing a warranty of any kind.

If you would like to use major pieces of RasMol in some other program, make
modifications to RasMol, or in some other way make what a lawyer would call
a "derived work", you are not only permitted to do so, you are encouraged to
do so. In addition to the things we discussed above, please do the
following:

   * 4. Please explain in your documentation how what you did differs from
     this version of RasMol; and
   * 5. Please make your modified source code available.

This version of RasMol is not in the public domain, but it is given freely
to the community in the hopes of advancing science. If you make changes,
please make them in a responsible manner, and please offer us the
opportunity to include those changes in future versions of RasMol.
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

This documentation directory contains the following "gzipped" files:

       README.gz        Text version of this file
       README.html.gz   HTML version of this file for WWW/HTTP

       manualUS.rtf.gz  8.5x11 RTF copy of User Manual
 (bin) manualUS.ps.gz   8.5x11 PostScript version of the RasMol User Manual
 (bin) manualUS.pdf.gz  8.5x11 PDF version of the RasMol User Manual
       manualUS.rtf.gz  A4 RTF copy of User Manual
 (bin) manualA4.ps.gz   A4 PostScript version of the RasMol User Manual
 (bin) manualA4.pdf.gz  A4 PDF version of the RasMol User Manual

       refcardUS.rtf.gz 8.5x11 RTF copy of Ref. Card
 (bin) refcardUS.ps.gz  8.5x11 PostScript version of Quick Reference Card
 (bin) refcardUS.pdf.gz 8.5x11 PDF version of Quick Reference Card
       refcardA4.rtf.gz A4 RTF copy of Ref. Card
 (bin) refcardA4.ps.gz  A4 PostScript version of Quick Reference Card
 (bin) refcardA4.pdf.gz A4 PDF version of Quick Reference Card

       rasmol.0.gz      ASCII text formatted version of UNIX 'man' page
       rasmol.1.gz      Nroff macro version of the UNIX `man' page

 (bin) rasmol.hlp.gz    RasMol help file (unix, mac, windows)

       rasmol.vms.gz    RasMol help file (VMS librarian HELP text)

       raswin.rtf.gz    RTF source of RasMol WinHelp document
 (bin) raswin.hpj.gz    Parameter file for RasMol WinHelp document
 (bin) raswin.hlp.gz    RasMol WinHelp file

       rasmol.html.gz   HTML version of User Manual for WWW/HTTP

All compressed files must be downloaded in binary form. Files marked "(bin)"
should be transmitted in binary form, even when uncompressed.

In addition to the files listed above, there is a master rasmol document
file, rasmol.doc.gz, a Makefile and a copy of Roger Sayle's document
preparation program prepdoc.c which are used in creating new versions of the
documentation.

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
Updated 22 January 2001,
rasmol@bernstein-plus-sons.com
